#IncludeOS is now free and open source

We've finally opened the lid on [IncludeOS](http://www.includeos.org), just in time for the [IEEE CloudCom](http://2015.cloudcom.org/) paper presentation today. We've done quite a lot of work since the paper was written, so here's an update on what IncludeOS is now, and what you can expect in the near future. 

## It's a bit like a java-vm, but for x86 C++
A Java Virtual Machine is a portable language runtime environment. Java becomes portable across hardware architectures and operating systems, because it uses a common instruction set. Once you've started a Java program, you can't log into it (unless your program itself provides the facilities), and you can't boot up any other programs inside it.

IncludeOS is like a language runtime for C++ programs, compiled into the common x86 instruction set. This has the obvious advantage of removing one layer of abstraction, compared to Java; with hardware virtualization the code will execute directly on the CPU. Like with a Java program, and other unikernels, an IncludeOS service is a program, with the language runtime attached. It's called IncludeOS because you start by saying `#include <os>` and whatever your service needs from the operating system will be included into the virtual machine. 

Think about the original reasons for creating Java; one main reason was definitely portability. With pervasive hardware virtualization you can now get similar portability for compiled C++ programs. We're currently only portable across x86 operating systems, but with virtualbox, you can run the same binary on windows, Linux and Mac. What's more; "Hello World" in IncludeOS on KVM, will have a much smaller memory footprint than "Hello world" in Java, running directly on the server - even when we take the whole Qemu process into account.

From this interesting premise, rather than working towards running a Java Virtual Machine, or supporting another high-level language, we want to focus on creating an intuitive and modern C++ hardware API, with minimal overhead. But of course - if somebody wants to use IncludeOS as a platform for supporting high level language runtimes, that would be great too. Before that can happen though, we'll have to get a stable API -  we're currently on 0.7.0, meaning that anything can change at any time.

## We want to make Node++
IncludeOS is pretty similar to Node.js in a few respects: It's single threaded at the moment, but highly efficient due to non-blocking I/O. This means that you'll have to use a callback-based programming style, just like with Javascript. The events you'll be subscribing to are all rooted in a physical interrupt - in fact, you can add callbacks to interrupts directly, if you want.  An interesting thing to keep in mind is that I/O in modern hardware is non-blocking by default, with Direct Memory Access (DMA). A network packet arriving into IncludeOS will result in an interrupt, but only after the whole packet is written directly into memory by the device. At that point, IncludeOS will defer the interrupt, and as soon as the CPU is done with whatever it was doing, it will call the callback delegate (possibly a lambda) of whoever's subscribing to that interrupt. That delegate can again use the same technique, to fire events higher up the stack. In our view, this kind of event-based programming fits hardware better than sequential, blocking programming. Also, GUI-programming has always been like this, so the techniques are well known. 

### We're making a github-based package manager
One very important feature we'll be needing in order to make IncludeOS grow, is a package manager. We're making one much like [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/), where anyone can create a package as a github repository, and then register that package in a central location for others to use. The idea is to have `$ include http` on the terminal, result in the possibility of writing `#include <http>` inside your IncludeOS service. This will obviously take some time, but hopefully we have something working by summer 2016.

## Networking from scratch
One thing you'll notice is that our network stack is currently being written from scratch. Are we crazy? Possibly. We obviously considered - and wanted to - port the stack from somewhere else, but not being intimately familiar with any existing kernel, I found that to be even harder than just doing it from scratch. I got a lot of help from reading the nicely annotated and cross-linked [SanOS source code](http://www.jbox.dk/sanos/source/), and once the virtio network driver was working, the rest wasn't nearly as hard as one might think - at least up to now. Clearly it will take time to make it complete, but the efforts it took to get form a driver, up to rudimentary TCP was really insignificant compared to the challenges we've faced when trying to integrate third-party libraries such as newlib (Standard C) and libc++ (Standard C++). And - getting to read RFC's and implementing the TCP handshake from scratch has really been a blast - a highly recommended exercise.


## C++ is a new language
If you haven't looked at C++ after 2011, you should look now -  "It feels like a new language" (Bjarne Stroustrup). While you can always argue that adding new feature won't necessarily make the language any better, it most definitely makes it more powerful. Here are a couple of really nice new language features we're using in IncludeOS:

1. Real Lambdas. Not function pointers, not just call operators, but lambdas just like you know and love from functional languages.
2. C++11 implementation of delegates (i.e. pointers to a member function in a class instance), which are exactly as fast as function pointers. We're using these everywhere. Reading [the implementation](https://github.com/hioa-cs/IncludeOS/blob/master/api/utility/delegate.hpp) is a great way to have your brain explode, but they work like magic.
4. User defined literals, and std::literals for units. You can set timers by passing in `100ms`, `10s` or `50min` as parameters to the same function. 
3. A lot of wisdom, packed into concise [guidelines from the Jedi Council](https://github.com/isocpp/CppCoreGuidelines).

Obviously, with C++ you can mess up the memory of your own program if you want to, but compared to C you have so many more tools for writing encapsulated and type-safe code. If you haven't looked at C++ since 2011, you should really look now. It "feels like new language" (Bjarne Stroustrup).

## Thanks for the warm welcome!
Opening up a repository after over a year, to much expectation from people you look up to, is pretty scary. There are so many things I'd like to improve, fix and add, but at some point you just have to let go and let it rip. The hope was that opening up would help the process - and indeed I got a pull request fixing all my typos the very next day. The inclusive response from [The Jedi Council](https://isocpp.org/), and the immediate welcome on twitter from the [Mirage](https://mirage.io/) guys have made us feel like family, more than competition, which is what we'd like to be. We hope to be able to contribute something back to the Unikernel effort as a whole.
